# ConsAlign

Computes the consensus alignment by comparing alignment patterns
of global, local and sub-global multiple sequence alignments generated 
by the alignment program [MAFFT][1].

## Quickstart

### Align a set of nucleotide or protein sequences in a single FASTA file

    consalign input.fa > output.aln

### Align multiple FASTA files located in a single folder

    consalign -batch path/to/folder -outdir path/to/save/alignments

## Background

ConsAlign uses the multiple alignment program [MAFFT][1] to create three
multiple sequence alignments from one set of unaligned sequences using
three different alignment strategies - global alignment based on the
Needleman–Wunsch algorithm, local alignment based on the
Smith–Waterman algorithm, and local with affine-gap penalty scoring.

Even if these alignments were based on the same set of sequences, the
result could be vastly different. Thus, it is important to identify sites
that align robustly regardless of the alignment model used. We call
robustly aligning sites "consistent sites" and sites which exhibit mixed
patterns "inconsistent sites".

## Method

ConsAlign identifies consistent sites by comparing the all alignment patterns
generated by the three strategies and marks it as "consistent" or
"inconsistent" by adding a marker sequence at the head of the generated
FASTA-formatted
alignment.

## Installation

### Requirements

- MAFFT must be installed in your system. ConsAlign does not include MAFFT.
- MAFFT must be included in the $PATH variable and executable from the shell.
  This means that the program can be started in any directory by simplying
  typing `mafft` from the command line.

ConsAlign is available as a compiled binary for Mac and Linux operating
systems.

- [Mac][2] - Compiled and tested on MacOS 10.11.6
- [Linux][3] - compiled and tested on Ubuntu Linux

For other systems, its possible to compile the program from source
using `go build`. Note that you must have [Go][4] installed in your system
to compile this program.

## Links

- [MAFFT download page][1]
- [ConsAlign for MacOS][2]
- [ConsAlign for Linux (Ubuntu)][3]

[1]: http://mafft.cbrc.jp/alignment/software/
[2]: /
[3]: /
